Feature/2020 07 21 jeroen meys securing applications with azure ad (#622)
ordina-jworks/ordina-jworks.github.io: _posts/2020-07-21-Securing-Applications-Azure-AD.md

> PKCE is (nearly always) mandatory in the [current OAuth 2.1 proposal](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-parecki-oauth-v2-1-03#section-9.8){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} by [Aaron Parecki](https://aaronparecki.com/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.

# The Azure AD part

We already discussed that our Angular app will be an OAuth client.
All clients have to be registered at the authorization server, so this is what we have to configure in Azure AD.

> A client is often called app(lication) in Azure AD.

We can do this via the [Azure Portal](https://portal.azure.com/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.
Log in and then navigate to Azure AD.
You should find the `App registrations` button on the left.

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img class="image fit-contain" src="{{ '/img/azure-ad/app-registration.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="" width="30%" />
</div>

Click `New registration` and fill in the form:

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img class="image fit-contain" src="{{ '/img/azure-ad/app-registration2.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="" width="70%" />
</div>

Pick a name that's appropriate for your client. 

> We can also set-up the redirect URI here. 

Reviewer: As a verb, I think it's written as 'set up' (no hyphen)

Yes.
Well, kind of.
Later on, we will have to make an adjustment, so don't close the portal just yet.
Once the client has been registered, we also need the client id and tenant id values for our application configuration.
I've changed mine to `<<<client_id>>>` and `<<<tenant_id>>>` for demonstration purposes, so don't forget to change these values to yours in the configuration examples.  

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img class="image fit-contain" src="{{ '/img/azure-ad/app-registration3.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="" width="90%" />
</div>

# The Spring Boot Part

Our [example Spring Boot application](https://github.com/jmeys/azure-ad-demo-backend){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} is a small API which serves some resources for the Angular application which we'll discuss further down.  
This is probably the easiest part to arrange, but also where I see most people get really confused.

## Azure Starters for Spring Boot

If you want to set up the Spring Boot application as an OAuth client, you could use the Azure Active Directory starter from the [Spring Initializr](https://start.spring.io/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.

> It's relatively hasle-free, given that you adjust some things left and right.  

Reviewer: hassle

}
```

or if you prefer Maven:

```xml
<dependencies>
    ...
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
      <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-oauth2-resource-server</artifactId>
    </dependency>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.springframework.security</groupId>
      <artifactId>spring-security-oauth2-jose</artifactId>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
```

We can now set up the authorization part: who has access to what.  

```java
import org.springframework.context.annotation.Configuration;
import org.springframework.security.config.annotation.web.builders.HttpSecurity;
import org.springframework.security.config.annotation.web.configuration.WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter;

@Configuration
public class SecurityConfig extends WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter {

    @Override
    protected void configure(HttpSecurity http) throws Exception {
        http.cors().and() // (1)
            .authorizeRequests().anyRequest().authenticated() // (2)
            .and()
            .oauth2ResourceServer().jwt(); // (3)
    }
}
```

There is a lot happening in a few lines here.
Let's break it down:

> 1. `http.cors()` Allows [Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} [preflight checks](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS#Preflighted_requests){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} to succeed.

Reviewer: allows? (no capital letter)

A first option is to configure the issuer URI so that it can find the correct endpoint in the discovery document.
The discovery document is a convenience endpoint where a lot of the client configuration can be found, including the web keys endpoint.

> You can find the discovery document by appending `.well-known/openid-configuration` to the issuer URI.

```
# application.properties
spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.issuer-uri=https://sts.windows.net/<<<tenant_id>>>/
```

Alternatively, we can search the keys endpoint ourselves in the discovery document and then provide this JSON web key (JWK) endpoint straight away:

```
# application.properties
spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.jwk-set-uri=https://login.windows.net/common/discovery/keys
```

In a real production configuration, I personally prefer to use the issuer URI as it offers most configuration via a single configuration property.
This will issue a network call to the discovery document when the application starts, so when testing in an environment where Azure AD is not reachable, this will cause the application to crash.

> This is where the jwk URI can save the day.

Reviewer: JWK in capitals?

import { AuthConfig } from 'angular-oauth2-oidc';

export const authConfig: AuthConfig = {
    issuer: 'https://login.microsoftonline.com/<<<tenant_id>>>/v2.0',
    redirectUri: window.location.origin + '/dashboard',
    clientId: '<<<client_id>>>',
    responseType: 'code',
    strictDiscoveryDocumentValidation: false,
    scope: 'openid api://<<<client_id>>>/app',
}
```

The `issuer`, `redirectUri`, `clientId` and `responseType` are pretty straightforward. 
All you need to do is to fill in the placeholder with the values from Azure AD. 
You can copy the values from the overview of the app in the Azure Portal.

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img class="image fit-contain" src="{{ '/img/azure-ad/app-values.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="" width="60%" />
</div>

This is where we need to tweak some configuration settings for the library to work with Azure AD.
`strictDiscoveryDocumentValidation` needs to be disabled due to the fact that not all URLs in the discovery document start with the issuer URL. 
This makes strict parsing fail, so we disable it.

You might also have noticed the weird looking `api://<<<client_id>>>/app` value in the list of scopes. 

> The reason why we do this, is explained very well in this [Medium blogpost](https://medium.com/@abhinavsonkar/making-azure-ad-oidc-compliant-5734b70c43ff){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} but boils down to the fact Azure AD uses a nonce in a special way in its JWT header.

Reviewer: No comma needed I think

</div>

> This application-specific scope can have any name, so it doesn't have to be `app`. 
> Just make sure you use the same scope in the application as the one you defined in the Azure Portal.

Another requested scope we configure is `openid`.
This indicates that we also want to log in the user.
We will not only receive an access token to contact the back-end API, but also an id token with information about the logged-in user.

> Azure AD will serve an id token, regardless of the open-id scope. But we include it anyway to respect the [specification](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.

The next step is to trigger the login when a user has not logged in yet:

```typescript
// app.component.ts
constructor(private oauthService: OAuthService) {
    this.oauthService.configure(authCodeFlowConfig); // (1)
    this.oauthService.loadDiscoveryDocumentAndLogin(); // (2)

    this.oauthService.set-upAutomaticSilentRefresh(); // (3)
}
```

1. We set up the OAuthService with the configuration from the previous step.
This makes sure it uses the authorization code flow + PKCE with the correct parameters.  

> 2. The discovery document will we loaded, which is the issuer URI plus the `.well-known/openid-configuration` suffix and then start the login process.  

Reviewer: will be* loaded?

In that case, the Angular application will only maintain a session with the back-end.

There are multiple advantages and disadvantages to both scenarios.
However, the biggest trade-off for our scenario is:

<b>SPA</b> as OAuth <b>client</b> / back-end as resource server:  
✅ Back-ends can be stateless: no session required  
❌ Less secure: access token stored in the browser  

<b>Spring Boot</b> back-end as OAuth <b>client</b>:  
❌ Has to be stateful: session required  
✅ More secure: tokens only in the back-end  

Having a stateless back-end makes it very easy to create or destroy new instances of it. 
Requests can go to any of those instances without the need for sticky load balancing or distributed sessions.  
The downside is that the tokens have to be stored in the browser, which can leak more easily than from a secure back-end. 
We control the back-end but not the user's computer, network, browser or its plugins. 
On top of that, [browsers also lack a secure storage mechanism](https://auth0.com/docs/tokens/token-storage){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}, unlike apps on mobile devices.

> In this blogpost, we will go with the first approach where the Angular app is the OAuth client.

Author: Duly noted

This means our set-up will be as follows:

| OAuth term | Concrete application |
| :--------: | :------------------: |
| Resource Owner | You |
| Resource Server | Spring Boot app |
| Authorization Server | Azure AD   |
| Client | Angular app |

## OAuth flows

OAuth has multiple flows.
The flow determines how tokens will be obtained from the authorization server by the client.

> The original [OAuth specification](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} defines four flows:

Reviewer 2: Maybe also add a one-liner to summarise what each flow is about?

A first option is to configure the issuer URI so that it can find the correct endpoint in the discovery document.
The discovery document is a convenience endpoint where a lot of the client configuration can be found, including the web keys endpoint.

> You can find the discovery document by appending `.well-known/openid-configuration` to the issuer URI.

```
# application.properties
spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.issuer-uri=https://sts.windows.net/<<<tenant_id>>>/
```

Alternatively, we can search the keys endpoint ourselves in the discovery document and then provide this JSON web key (JWK) endpoint straight away:

```
# application.properties
spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.jwk-set-uri=https://login.windows.net/common/discovery/keys
```

In a real production configuration, I personally prefer to use the issuer URI as it offers most configuration via a single configuration property.
This will issue a network call to the discovery document when the application starts, so when testing in an environment where Azure AD is not reachable, this will cause the application to crash.
This is where the JWK URI can save the day.

> 

Author: Very nice idea. I'll keep this for a post about testing OAuth applications 🙂

# The Angular Part

When we now browse to any back-end endpoint, we receive: HTTP 401 Unauthorized.  

> Let's fix this in our [example Angular application](https://github.com/jmeys/azure-ad-demo-frontend){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.

Reviewer 2: Also a single commit. 👌🏼

Even when there will be Microsoft libraries that can solve this problem, I try to stay vendor-neutral whenever possible.
This makes it relatively easy to switch from one OAuth provider to another one like [Auth0](https://auth0.com/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}, [AWS Cognito](https://aws.amazon.com/cognito/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}, [Okta](https://www.okta.com/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}, [Keycloak](https://www.keycloak.org/){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}, ...
The only downside is that vendor-specific features will not be available.
An example of this is the [On-Behalf-Of flow (OBO)](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/active-directory/develop/v2-oauth2-on-behalf-of-flow){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}, which is only supported by the Microsoft libraries.

Since OAuth and OIDC are standards, we should be able to use any (certified) library which supports these.
I say "should", as the specifications left a lot of room for tinkering and additions. 

> We'll see what I mean by this during the implementation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
During the implementation, you will see what I mean```

My favourite go-to library is [angular-oauth2-oidc](https://github.com/manfredsteyer/angular-oauth2-oidc){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} by Manfred Steyer. 
This is also the one we'll use in this example.

> Alternatively, you can use the [msal-angular library](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@azure/msal-angular){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} if you are fine with the implicit flow for now.

## Example Application: Tour of Heroes

> As an example of an Angular application, we can use the [Tour of Heroes](https://angular.io/tutorial) Angular tutorial application. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an example of an Angular application, we can use the [Tour of Heroes](https://angular.io/tutorial){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"} Angular tutorial application. 
```

Reviewer 2: So, is the FE application specified above based on the Tour of Heroes application of is it something different? This because you mentioned that we will integrate security to that FE application but here you tell the reader that he/she has to start with the Angular tutorial application.

Maybe just need to clear that out.

Feel free to use your own application as there should not be too many differences.

Because the Tour of Heroes application uses an in-memory API instead of a Spring Boot application, we should change this in the code.
Of course, if you are using your own application, you can skip this step.

```typescript
// app.module.ts

// REMOVE this part:

// The HttpclientInMemoryWebApiModule module intercepts HTTP requests
// and returns simulated server responses.
// Remove it when a real server is ready to receive requests.
HttpclientInMemoryWebApiModule.forRoot(
  InMemoryDataService, { dataEncapsulation: false }
)

```

and also change the url in the `HeroService`:

```typescript
// hero.service.ts

private heroesUrl = 'http://localhost:8080/api/heroes';
```

Now we're all set to go.

## The Angular Implementation

We start by installing the `angular-auth2-oidc` library:

```bash
npm i angular-oauth2-oidc --save
```

Next, we import the `OAuthModule` module:

> ```

Reviewer 2: Missing styling:
```suggestion
```typescript
```

Next up is the OAuth configuration.

```typescript
// auth.config.ts
import { AuthConfig } from 'angular-oauth2-oidc';

export const authConfig: AuthConfig = {
    issuer: 'https://login.microsoftonline.com/<<<tenant_id>>>/v2.0',
    redirectUri: window.location.origin + '/dashboard',
    clientId: '<<<client_id>>>',
    responseType: 'code',
    strictDiscoveryDocumentValidation: false,
    scope: 'openid api://<<<client_id>>>/app',
}
```

The `issuer`, `redirectUri`, `clientId` and `responseType` are pretty straightforward. 
All you need to do is to fill in the placeholder with the values from Azure AD. 
You can copy the values from the overview of the app in the Azure Portal.

<div style="text-align: center;" >
  <img class="image fit-contain" src="{{ '/img/azure-ad/app-values.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}" alt="" width="60%" />
</div>

This is where we need to tweak some configuration settings for the library to work with Azure AD.
`strictDiscoveryDocumentValidation` needs to be disabled due to the fact that not all URLs in the discovery document start with the issuer URL. 

> This makes strict parsing fail, so we disable it.

Reviewer 2: Does this cause a security vulnerability or what are the consequences of this?

> Azure AD will serve an id token, regardless of the open-id scope. But we include it anyway to respect the [specification](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html){:target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"}.

The next step is to trigger the login when a user has not logged in yet:

```typescript
// app.component.ts
constructor(private oauthService: OAuthService) {
    this.oauthService.configure(authCodeFlowConfig); // (1)
    this.oauthService.loadDiscoveryDocumentAndLogin(); // (2)

    this.oauthService.set-upAutomaticSilentRefresh(); // (3)
}
```

1. We set up the OAuthService with the configuration from the previous step.
This makes sure it uses the authorization code flow + PKCE with the correct parameters.  
2. The discovery document will be loaded, which is the issuer URI plus the `.well-known/openid-configuration` suffix and then start the login process.  
3. As access tokens have a short lifespan, we want them to be automatically refreshed in the background.

We can now try out the application and should be redirected to the Microsoft login page.  

> After logging in, when we browse to the heroes page, we can see the 401 is gone, and the heroes are fetched again. 

Reviewer 2: Maybe also mention and link the "final" branch of both the backend and the frontend to share the full solution and to conclude the blogpost.
